.\" @(#)rpc_secure.3n	2.1 88/08/08 4.0 RPCSRC; from 1.19 88/06/24 SMI
.\" $FreeBSD: src/lib/libc/rpc/rpc_secure.3,v 1.14 2002/12/19 09:40:23 ru Exp $
.\"
.Dd February 16, 1988
.Dt RPC 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm rpc_secure
.Nd library routines for secure remote procedure calls
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In rpc/rpc.h
.Ft int
.Fn getnetname "char *name"
.Ft int
.Fn host2netname "char *name" "const char *host" "const char *domain"
.Ft int
.Fn key_decryptsession "const char *remotename" "des_block *deskey"
.Ft int
.Fn key_encryptsession "const char *remotename" "des_block *deskey"
.Ft int
.Fn key_gendes "des_block *deskey"
.Ft int
.Fn key_setsecret "const char *key"
.Ft int
.Fn netname2host "char *name" "char *host" "int hostlen"
.Ft int
.Fn netname2user "char *name" "uid_t *uidp" "gid_t *gidp" "int *gidlenp" "gid_t *gidlist"
.Ft int
.Fn user2netname "char *name" "const uid_t uid" "const char *domain"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
These routines are part of the
.Tn RPC
library.  They implement
.Tn DES
Authentication.  See
.Xr rpc 3
for further details about
.Tn RPC .
.Pp
.Pp
The
.Fn getnetname
function
installs the unique, operating-system independent netname of
the
caller in the fixed-length array
.Fa name .
Returns
.Dv TRUE
if it succeeds and
.Dv FALSE
if it fails.
.Pp
The
.Fn host2netname
function
converts from a domain-specific hostname to an
operating-system independent netname.
Returns
.Dv TRUE
if it succeeds and
.Dv FALSE
if it fails.
Inverse of
.Fn netname2host .
.Pp
The
.Fn key_decryptsession
function
is an interface to the keyserver daemon, which is associated
with
.Tn RPC Ns 's
secure authentication system
.Tn ( DES
authentication).
User programs rarely need to call it, or its associated routines
.Fn key_encryptsession ,
.Fn key_gendes
and
.Fn key_setsecret .
System commands such as
.Xr login 1
and the
.Tn RPC
library are the main clients of these four routines.
.Pp
The
.Fn key_decryptsession
function
takes a server netname and a
.Tn DES
key, and decrypts the key by
using the public key of the server and the secret key
associated with the effective uid of the calling process.  It
is the inverse of
.Fn key_encryptsession .
.Pp
The
.Fn key_encryptsession
function
is a keyserver interface routine.
It
takes a server netname and a des key, and encrypts
it using the public key of the server and the secret key
associated with the effective uid of the calling process.  It
is the inverse of
.Fn key_decryptsession .
.Pp
The
.Fn key_gendes
function
is a keyserver interface routine.
It
is used to ask the keyserver for a secure conversation key.
Choosing one
.Qq random
is usually not good enough,
because
the common ways of choosing random numbers, such as using the
current time, are very easy to guess.
.Pp
The
.Fn key_setsecret
function
is a keyserver interface routine.
It is used to set the key for
the effective
.Fa uid
of the calling process.
.Pp
The
.Fn netname2host
function
converts from an operating-system independent netname to a
domain-specific hostname.
Returns
.Dv TRUE
if it succeeds and
.Dv FALSE
if it fails.  Inverse of
.Fn host2netname .
.Pp
The
.Fn netname2user
function
converts from an operating-system independent netname to a
domain-specific user ID.
Returns
.Dv TRUE
if it succeeds and
.Dv FALSE
if it fails.
Inverse of
.Fn user2netname .
.Pp
The
.Fn user2netname
function
converts from a domain-specific username to an operating-system
independent netname.
Returns
.Dv TRUE
if it succeeds and
.Dv FALSE
if it fails.
Inverse of
.Fn netname2user .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr rpc 3 ,
.Xr xdr 3 ,
.Xr keyserv 8
.Pp
The following manuals:
.Rs
.%B Remote Procedure Calls: Protocol Specification
.Re
.Rs
.%B Remote Procedure Call Programming Guide
.Re
.Rs
.%B Rpcgen Programming Guide
.Re
.Rs
.%B RPC: Remote Procedure Call Protocol Specification
.%O RFC1050, Sun Microsystems Inc., USC-ISI
.Re
